---
title: "Gravitational field calculation in spherical coordinates using variable densities in depth"
date: 2018-12-29
author: me, agustina, mario, leo
repository: pinga-lab/tesseroid-variable-density
journal: Geophysical Journal International
thumbnail: soler2018-thumbnail.jpg
inreview: true
layout: publication
---
{%- from "utils.html" import figure -%}

# Abstract

We present a new methodology to compute the gravitational fields generated by
tesseroids (spherical prisms) whose density varies continuously with depth
according to an arbitrary function. It approximates the gravitational fields
through the Gauss-Legendre Quadrature along with two discretization algorithms
that automatically control its accuracy by adaptively dividing the tesseroid
into smaller ones. The first one is a preexisting adaptive discretization
algorithm that reduces the errors due to the distance between the tesseroid and
the computation point. The second is a new density-based discretization
algorithm that decreases the errors introduced by the variation of the density
function with depth. The amount of divisions made by each algorithm is
indirectly controlled by two parameters: the distance-size ratio and the delta
ratio. We have obtained analytical solutions for a spherical shell with
radially variable density and compared them to the results of the numerical
model for linear and exponential density functions. These comparisons allowed
us to obtain optimum values for the distance-size and delta ratios that yield
an accuracy of 0.1% of the analytical solutions. The resulting optimal values
of distance-size ratio for the gravitational potential, its gradient, and
Marussi tensor are 1, 2 and 8, respectively. A delta ratio of 0.2 is needed for
the computation of the gravitational potential and its gradient components,
while a value of 0.01 must be used for the Marussi tensor components. Lastly,
we apply this new methodology to model the Neuquén Basin, a foreland basin in
Argentina with a maximum depth of over 5000 m, using an exponential density
function.

{{ figure("soler2018.jpg", caption="Application of the methodology to the Neuquén Basin,
a foreland basin in the southern Andes. (a) Topography of the Neuquén Basin and its
location in South America. (b) Thickness of the sedimentary basin. Inset shows the
exponential density profile used in the modeling. (c) Resulting vertical gravitational
acceleration at 10 km height modeled by tesseroids with exponential density variation in
depth. (d) Difference between gravitational acceleration modeled using the exponential
density profile and a homogeneous density.") }}
